[RFC 0075]: Declarative wrappers (#75)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0075-declarative-wrappers.md

---
feature: Declarative Wrappers
start-date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
author: Doron Behar <me@doronbehar.com>
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: POC Implementation at [#85103](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103).
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Manage the environment of wrappers declaratively and deprecate shell based
methods for calculating runtime environment of packages. Make wrappers a
separate derivation so that mere changes to the environment will not trigger a
rebuild. Make it easier to debug why env vars are added to an executable, by
using Nix as the language to evaluate what env vars are needed, instead of not
documented good enough and not easily debug-able shell hooks.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

We have numerous issues regarding wrappers and our wrapper shell hooks. Here's

> a list of them, sorted to categories.

Reviewer: I'd suggest using bullet points here to describe what issues this RFC resolves, before going into the details.

Author: > I'd suggest using bullet points here to describe what issues this RFC resolves, before going into the details.

Done.

based builder of a Python environment, even if this environment is used only
for a build, should make it easier to control and alter it's e.g `$PATH`.

- [issue 83667](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/83667)

@FRidh I see no reason for Python deps of Python packages to need to be in
`propagatedBuildInputs` and not regular `buildInputs` but please correct me if
I'm wrong. I think this was done so in the past so it'd be easy to know how to
wrap them? Declarative wrappers won't require runtime-env-requiring deps to be
only in `propagatedBuildInputs` or `buildInputs` - it should pick such deps
from both lists. Hence, (I think) it should be possible to make Python's static
builds consistent with other ecosystems.

- [issue 86054](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/86054)

@ttuegel TBH I can't tell if declarative wrappers might help, but I'm linking
this issue here because @worldofpeace wrote it might be related to wrappers?
Feel free to suggest removing this in the RFC review.

- [issue 49132](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/49132)
- [issue 54278](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/54278)
- [issue 39493](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/39493)

> `GDK_PIXBUF` compatibilities? I haven't investigated them to the details, so feel

Reviewer 2: Both of the issues related to gdk-pixbuf only happened for non-wrapped derivations and current `wrapGAppsHook` would already fix them.

The issue was, IIRC, that gdk-pixbuf NixOS module sets `GDK_PIXBUF_MODULE_FILE` environment variable, which was enabling binary gdk-pixbuf modules with ABI incompatible with the gdk-pixbuf the programs linked against. In [one case](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/54278) it was caused by a bug that slipped through the ABI stability guarantees, in the [other](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/60254) by running a program for `i686` on `x86_64`.

Either way, it is somewhat orthogonal to wrappers. Only that we might want to always wrap graphical applications with librsvg gdk-pixbuf module.

> `GDK_PIXBUF` compatibilities? I haven't investigated them to the details, so feel

Reviewer 2: Though there is one concern around `GDK_PIXBUF_MODULE_FILE` – the environment variable supports only a single path so we need to build the cache containing all the modules using `gdk-pixbuf-query-loaders` – the [current hook actually does not actually do that](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/15affbfbd590275e9d123644b706436d285fd358/pkgs/development/libraries/gdk-pixbuf/setup-hook.sh#L3-L13)! but it is required for some image formats to work in e.g. `eog`. We will need to take inspiration in [the module](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/15affbfbd590275e9d123644b706436d285fd358/nixos/modules/services/x11/gdk-pixbuf.nix#L11-L25).

and
[`wrapNeovim`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/a5985162e31587ae04ddc65c4e06146c2aff104c/pkgs/applications/editors/neovim/wrapper.nix#L11-L24)
which will accept a single derivation or an array of them and will wrap all of
their executables with the proper environment, based on their inputs.

`wrapGeneric` should iterate recursively all `buildInputs` and
`propagatedBuildInputs` of the input derivation(s), and construct an attrset with
which it'll calculate the necessary environment of the executables. Then either
via `wrapProgram` or a better method, it'll create the wrappers.

A contributor using `wrapGeneric` shouldn't _care_ what type of wrapping needs
to be performed on his derivation's executables - whether these are Qt related
wrappings or a Gtk / gobject related. `wrapGeneric` should know all there is to
know about environment variables every library / input may need during runtime,
and with this information at hand, construct the necessary wrapper.

In order for `wrapGenric` to know all of this information about our packaged
libraries - the information about runtime env, we need to write in the

> `passthru`s of these libraries, what env vars they need. Such information was

Reviewer: Limiting ourselves to environment variables is at times too limiting. Also, environment variables should be the implementation detail, although the variable names could be used as identifier.

##### Python example.
If you have a closure of packages, and there happens to be a Python application with Python libraries as dependencies, then that group of packages needs to be composed. If there is another Python application depending on other libraries, then that needs to be composed separately. At least, they are not allowed to share the same `*PYTHONPATH`. (Note one also should not use `PYTHONPATH` but that's a different discussion.)

Author: > If there is another Python application depending on other libraries, then that needs to be composed separately. At least, they are not allowed to share the same *PYTHONPATH

I see this is all about ABI compatibility, and I understand the issue while I remember you mentioned this in https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103 . I'm still unsure whether it's possible it'd happen, assuming our libraries are composed OK. @FRidh could you perhaps give a situation (with perhaps some rough code examples) to a situation where say Python2's and Python3's libraries will share the same `*PYTHONPATH`? It's important to note that the current design counts upon `buildInputs` and `propagatedBuildInputs` only.

Reviewer: Different Python version is one case, the other is simply applications requiring different versions of a dependency.

Reviewer 3: This can happen for example when you have a python3 application that shells out to an python2 application.

Reviewer: Currently we prevent some of these effects by unsetting `NIX_PYTHONPATH` when a Python program, thereby avoid leakage. This problem with wrappers and environment variables should also be noted clearly in the RFC.

Author: OK I think I start to understand better the concerns. But still, this is not a "Drawback" of the idea, I mean, we still need to workaround such edge cases specifically in our current methods right? I agree though that it might be more complicated if someone is obliged to use `wrapGeneric` and not a wrap hook.

As an implementation detail, it may be worth noting that it'd be nice to make `wrapGeneric` able to "catch" such incompatible values in an environment variable.

---
feature: Declarative Wrappers
start-date: 2020-08-16
author: Doron Behar <me@doronbehar.com>
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: @FRidh, @lheckemann, @edolstra

> shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
shepherd-leader: @FRidh
```

1. Running `nixos-rebuild` after a change to sane or it's configuration,
   requires the user to logout and login, to see effects of the changes.  
   
2.
[Apparently](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/90201#issuecomment-683304279)
`LD_LIBRARY_PATH` is cleared when an application runs with extra capabilities.
This causes the current gnome-shell wayland wrapper to unset the
`LD_LIBRARY_PATH` many scanner related programs now rely upon.

Declarative wrappers should enable us to make such applications that use a
`SANE_CONFIG_DIR` and `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` to be configured during the wrap phase,
and get rid of these global environment variables.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

The end goal is to make the experience of getting a derivation wrapped as
automatic as possible. A derivation that needs some environment variables in
order to work will get these environment variables set in the wrapper by
`mkDerivation`'s standard `fixupPhase`.  As a start, we'll (me probably) will
introduce a new `makeWrapperAuto` setup hook that will take care of this in the
way described as follows.

As a start, we'll need to think about all packages in Nixpkgs that using them

> requires some environment variables to be set. Every such package will put in

Author: > The previous wording seemed a bit funny. Does this sound better?

Yes this is better. Haven't pushed this rewording yet.

`$dev/nix-support/wrappers.json` a list of environment variables that are
"linked" to this package. "linked" means that using this package requires these
environment variables to be set in runtime.

`makeWrapperAuto` will traverse all `buildInputs` and `propagatedBuildInputs`
of a derivation, and look for a `wrappers.json` file in these inputs. It will
collect all the environment variables that need to be set in the resulting
executables, by merging all of the values of the environment variables in all
of the inputs' `wrappers.json` files. `wrappers.json` might look like this for
a given package:

```json
{
  "GI_TYPELIB_PATH": [
    "/nix/...gobject-introspection.../...",
    "/nix/...librsvg.../...",
  ],
  "GIO_EXTRA_MODULES": [
    "/nix/...dconf.../lib/gio/modules"
  ],
  "XDG_DATA_DIRS": [
    "/nix/...gtk+3.../...",
    "/nix/...gsettings-desktop-schemas.../..."

>   ],

Author: I thought about answers to some of these questions back when I implemented https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103/files#diff-aad93ba22adfe208c7b970a7b9d0f73dba9306b8a4fc4eaacfb2ac331aed9ea1R51-R74 . I prepared some answers in the RFC to be pushed, but I don't know:

- Why order would matter?
- I never encountered a case where paths should be escaped, or when other values should be escaped. In case of environment variables values that need escaping, they probably will not be originated from packages, and that can be handled in the `postInstall` snippet example below, by manually quoting values in the json file..

> We can also go further. Instead of setting `$PATH` to a massive list does it make more sense to build a folder of symlinks and set `$PATH` to a single element? If so will we special-case some variables or should we use a more detailed schema (as proposed below)?
> 

I thought about this exactly even back when I implemented https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103 so it will be possible to avoid what https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/84689 fixed. I addressed this idea in the changes I made to the RFC that I haven't pushed yet.

I'm not sure I understand:

> Furthermore does this replace or prepend or append? Replace seems the purest but commands such as `parallel -- command-from-my-path` are not uncommon. In that case there seems to be no good option.

>   ],

Reviewer 5: > Why order would matter?

If two packages have a `bin/foo` then the order will decide which one is used. For most of these `PATH`-like variables the first match is used.

> I never encountered a case where paths should be escaped, or when other values should be escaped.

It is rare but does happen. For things like `PATH` I don't think there is even a way to quote elements. You simply can't have a path that contains `:` in your `PATH`. At the very least it would be nice to raise an error. It would be even better if we can "alias" the path to a safe name or escape the invalid characters (if supported by the variable, which is rare)

> I'm not sure I understand:

My point is that the argument to a parallel is a command to run, but that command should be pulled from the PATH of the calling shell, not a PATH that may be set but a wrapper in the parallel derivation.

>   ],

Author: > > Why order would matter?
> 
> If two packages have a `bin/foo` then the order will decide which one is used. For most of these `PATH`-like variables the first match is used.

I think it's super rare to have two packages providing the same binary like that, and finding them used together in the wrapping while wishing only one package's `out/bin` to rule..

Also paths escaping is too rare, so I think it'll be best to leave these topics out of scope for the RFC.

As for `parallel` commands. Do you mean `parallel` invocations in the builds of derivations? something like:

```nix
  preInstall = ''
    parallel -- commands that take a-long time
  '';
```

>   ],

Reviewer 5: I don't think collisions are super rare. After all nix has a priority system for some reason. I think we should at least define how this is handled. 

As for the escaping I think that it is fine to ignore this for now. But I think it should be mentioned explicitly. 

For the "parallel problem" I mean in general. Any time you have a wrapper that both needs commands itself as well as forwards a user's command we have this problem. I think we should discuss how this is handled. Currently in nixpkgs it is very inconsistent. 

But the most important point still stands. We need *some* configuration. If only to specify the separator. So I think that needs to be included.

>   ],

Reviewer 6: PATH order is support important. Tools like trash, safe-rm and molly-guard heavily rely on it. Also I commonly use a higher priority entry in PATH to create wrappers for none interactive shells. For environment variables which are similar to PATH like NIX_PATH order is also super important and ordering the entries for example alphabetically breaks things.

What is safe to do is deduplication when an entry is encountered the second time and I think this should be done by default to prevent to long environment variables.

contrast to the [POC Nixpkgs PR](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103)
and the [original design of the
RFC](https://github.com/doronbehar/rfcs/blob/60d3825fdd4e6574b7e5d70264445d1c801368c6/rfcs/0075-declarative-wrappers.md#L251),
prior to [the 1st
meeting](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/75#issuecomment-760942876),
traversing all the inputs and the inputs' inputs, will not happen during eval
time and only partly, during build time - every package already built will
provide it's reverse dependencies all the information they need about
environment variables of itself and of all of it's inputs and it's inputs'
inputs.

Most of the work to do will be:

1. Gather information about what environment variables are "linked" to each
   package, and edit these derivations to include a `wrappers.json` in them.
   This should be done with `makeWrapperAuto` as well, see (2).
2. Design the `makeWrapperAuto` shell hook:
  - It should introduce a shell function (to be called `wrappersInfo`) that
    will allow piping a JSON string from `builtins.toJSON` and spit a
    `wrappers.json` that will include both what was piped into it, and the

>     content from the package's various inputs' `wrappers.json` files.

Author: Yes, perhaps the name `wrappersInfo` isn't very explanatory, and `combineWrappers` or alike is better. I don't think though this function should be split to two. By piping I meant (as explained further on):

```nix
  postInstall = ''
    echo "${builtins.toJSON {
      GST_PLUGIN_SYSTEM_PATH_1_0 = [
        # @out@ should be expanded by `combineWrappersInfo` to what's in `$out`, see:
        # https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103#issuecomment-613071343
        "@out@/lib/gstreamer-1.0"
      ];
    }}" | combineWrappersInfo
  '';
```

`passAsFile` seems **almost** appropriate to me :). If `stdenv.mkDerivation` wouldn't have mind having attributes it can't coerce into a string, but pass them as json files. To explain, this example doesn't evaluate:

```nix
  extraWrappersInfo = {
    GST_PLUGIN_SYSTEM_PATH_1_0 = [
      "@out@/lib/gstreamer-1.0"
    ];
  };
  passAsFile = [ "extraWrappersInfo" ];
  preBuild = ''
    cat $extraWrappersInfoPath
  '';
```

>     content from the package's various inputs' `wrappers.json` files.

Reviewer 7: We can modify stdenv to accept `extraWrappersInfo` as a "special" attribute, like `buildInputs` or `pname`. `stdenv.mkDerivation` can then handle converting `extraWrappersInfo` to a JSON document which is what is then passed to the `derivation` builtin and added to `passAsFile`.

Conceptually, this would look like

```nix
mkDerivation = {
…
wrapperInfo ? null
…
}:
derivation ({
  …
} // optionalAttrs (wrapperInfo != null) {
  wrapperInfo = builtins.toJSON wrapperInfo;
  passAsFile = ["wrapperInfo"];
})
…
```

Plus a `writeWrapperInfoPhase` or similar which scans `buildInputs` for wrappers and combines them with `wrapperInfo`.

  - It should make the executables in `$out/bin/` get wrapped according to
    what's currently in this package's `wrappers.json`, during `fixupPhase`.
  - The above should be also possible to do manually for executables outside

>     `$out/bin/` with say adding to a derivation a Nix variable:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    `$out/bin/` by setting `wrapExtraPrograms` on the derivation:
```
Maybe we should also not wrap everything in `$out/bin` indiscriminately though? Maybe we should have a variable specifying _exactly_ which files to wrap, not just which files to wrap in addition to `$out/bin`.

```

3. Most of the packages with linked environment variables, have lots of reverse
   dependencies, so once `makeWrapperAuto` is ready, it'd nice to have a hydra
   job that will build all of these packages with the `wrappers.json` file in
   them. For instance these packages include:
   - `gdk-pixbuf`
   - `gsettings-desktop-schemas`
   - `pango`
   - `gtk3`

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

When switching to `makeWrapperAuto` from `makeWrapper` there shouldn't be
manual usage of `wrapProgram` for most cases. A package that uses `wrapProgram`
should be able to switch to `wrappersInfo` and declare any nontrivial
environment variables with it to get propagated to reverse dependencies and to
it's executables automatically.

Currently I imagine the usage of `wrappersInfo` (the name can be debated) as
so:

```nix
  # Propagate GST plugins' path
  postInstall = ''
    echo "${builtins.toJSON {
      GST_PLUGIN_SYSTEM_PATH_1_0 = [
        # @out@ should be expanded by `wrappersInfo` to what's in `$out`, see:
        # https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103#issuecomment-613071343
        "@out@/lib/gstreamer-1.0"

>       ];

Author: > Wouldn't `echo "${builtins.toJSON { foo = "bar"; }}"` result in `echo "{"foo":"bar"}"`? Or am I missing something here?

Oh I understand now.. Perhaps we should also use `lib.strings.escapeShellArg`. I have changed this composition into something much nicer.

contrast to the [POC Nixpkgs PR](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103)
and the [original design of the
RFC](https://github.com/doronbehar/rfcs/blob/60d3825fdd4e6574b7e5d70264445d1c801368c6/rfcs/0075-declarative-wrappers.md#L251),
prior to [the 1st
meeting](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/75#issuecomment-760942876),
traversing all the inputs and the inputs' inputs, will not happen during eval
time and only partly, during build time - every package already built will
provide its reverse dependencies all the information they need about
environment variables.

Most of the work to do will be:

1. Gather information about what environment variables are "linked" to each
   package, and edit these derivations to include a `wrappers.json` in them.
   This should be done with `makeWrapperAuto` as well, see (2).
2. Design the `makeWrapperAuto` shell hook:
  - It should introduce a shell function (to be called `combineWrappersInfo`) that
    will allow piping a JSON string from `builtins.toJSON` and spit a
    `wrappers.json` that will include both what was piped into it, and the
    content from the package's various inputs' `wrappers.json` files.

>   - It should wrap the executables in `$out/bin/` according to

Reviewer 7: Maybe we should also not wrap everything in `$out/bin` indiscriminately. A variable could specify which programs to wrap (as a list of glob patterns?), defaulting to `$out/bin/*` but permitting an override to _not_ wrap everything in `$out/bin` and/or _also_ wrap things outside `$out/bin`.

Also, should the wrapping apply to all outputs in multiple-output derivations? My guess (though not well-thought-out) is that `$out/bin/*`, `$bin/bin/*`, and `$out/libexec/**/*` should be wrapped by default.

Author: A list of glob patterns is a good idea.

    `$out/bin/` by setting `wrapExtraPrograms` on the derivation:

```nix
  wrapExtraPrograms = [ "/libexec/" "/share/scripts" ];
```

3. Most of the packages with linked environment variables, have lots of reverse
   dependencies, so once `makeWrapperAuto` is ready, it'd nice to have a hydra
   job that will build all of these packages with the `wrappers.json` file in
   them. For instance these packages include:
   - `gdk-pixbuf`
   - `gsettings-desktop-schemas`
   - `pango`
   - `gtk3`

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

When switching to `makeWrapperAuto` from `makeWrapper` there shouldn't be
manual usage of `wrapProgram` for most cases. A package that uses `wrapProgram`
should be able to switch to `combineWrappersInfo` and declare any nontrivial
environment variables with it to get propagated to reverse dependencies and to
it's executables automatically.

Currently I imagine the usage of `combineWrappersInfo` (the name can be debated) as
so:

```nix
  # Propagate GST plugins' path
  postInstall = ''
    echo "${builtins.toJSON {
      GST_PLUGIN_SYSTEM_PATH_1_0 = [

>         # @out@ should be expanded by `combineWrappersInfo` to what's in `$out`, see:

Reviewer 7: We should probably use [`${placeholder "out"}`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#builtin-placeholder) here? Or am I missing something?

Author: > We should probably use [`${placeholder "out"}`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#builtin-placeholder) here? Or am I missing something?

A lot of people ask that, see https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103#issuecomment-613071343 - I linked that explanation in the comment in the code snippet.

        # https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/85103#issuecomment-613071343
        "@out@/lib/gstreamer-1.0"
      ];
    }}" | combineWrappersInfo
  '';
```

`wrapQtAppsHook` and `wrapGAppsHook` should be replaced with `makeWrapperAuto`

> while enable derivations to get rid of well known workarounds such as:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
which enables removing frequent workarounds such as:
```

```nix
  # hook for gobject-introspection doesn't like strictDeps
  # https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/56943
  strictDeps = false;
```

And often seen in Python + Qt programs:

```nix
  preFixup = ''
    makeWrapperArgs+=("''${qtWrapperArgs[@]}")
  '';
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> Using `wrapProgram` will be simpler then using `combineWrappersInfo` and it might be

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Using `wrapProgram` is simpler than using `combineWrappersInfo` and it might be
```

     => /nix/store/qssjj6ki7jiskw2kfygvfiy8fxrclwrl-kconfigwidgets-5.71.0-dev
```

Also similar (but possibly fixable by moving `gobject-introspection` to a
different inputs list?):
 
```
$ nix why-depends -f. beets gobject-introspection.dev
/nix/store/93lfrhm8vp17m8ziqi8vp6v4cff67wkb-beets-1.4.9
╚═══bin/beet: …-expat-2.2.8-dev/bin:/nix/store/y3ym76wrak3300vsjyf3klr52cnzmxwd-gobject-introspection-1.64.1-de…
    => /nix/store/y3ym76wrak3300vsjyf3klr52cnzmxwd-gobject-introspection-1.64.1-dev
```

## Other issues

- [issue 60260](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/60260)

General, justified complaint about wrappers.

- [issue 95027](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/95027)
- [issue 23018](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/23018)
- [issue 11133](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/11133)
- [pull 95569](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/95569)

Since our wrappers are shell scripts, `gdb` can't run them. What if we had
written a C based wrapper, that perhaps would read what environment it needs to
set from a JSON file, and it will call the unwrapped original executable? I

> need feedback regarding whether `gdb` will play nice with this.

Reviewer 4: An alternative to this is the libtool approach, which still allow you to use strace,gdb etc: https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Invoking-libtool.html
If a binary wrapper is used than it should be compiled for every target as this increases package size/build time. Instead having the wrapper reading its actual configuration from the same directory might work.

Reviewer 7: @Mic92 do you mean it should _not_ be compiled for each package?

Reviewer 8: Worked a bit on a wrapper tool some time ago: [svep](https://git.sr.ht/~rycee/svep). Maybe there are some useful ideas there?

Author: > Worked a bit on a wrapper tool some time ago: [svep](https://git.sr.ht/~rycee/svep). Maybe there are some useful ideas there?

That's a nice tool :), but I'm not sure it helps a lot, it seems it only supplies an alternative to `makeCWrapper`, but that depends on rust, and not pure C99.

We won't be able for example to use it to save the wrapping information of a package, as we want to access that information independently, from `${pkg}/nix-support/`, and not from the binaries that the package may distribute.

`kdoctools` due to it picked by `wrapQtAppsHook`:

```
$ nix why-depends -f. kdeconnect kdoctools
/nix/store/sh42k6cz4j48br4cxi2qn173rys4japp-kdeconnect-1.3.5
╚═══bin/kdeconnect-cli: …xport XDG_DATA_DIRS='/nix/store/m16681i5dhhkhszi9w42ir037jvbnab9-kdoctools-5.71.0/share'${XDG_DA…
    => /nix/store/m16681i5dhhkhszi9w42ir037jvbnab9-kdoctools-5.71.0
```

A similar issue is with `kconfigwidgets.dev` and `kdeconnect`:

```
$ nix why-depends -f. kdeconnect kdeframeworks.kconfigwidgets.dev
 /nix/store/sh42k6cz4j48br4cxi2qn173rys4japp-kdeconnect-1.3.5
 ╚═══bin/kdeconnect-cli: …port QT_PLUGIN_PATH='/nix/store/qssjj6ki7jiskw2kfygvfiy8fxrclwrl-kconfigwidgets-5.71.0-dev/lib/q…
     => /nix/store/qssjj6ki7jiskw2kfygvfiy8fxrclwrl-kconfigwidgets-5.71.0-dev
```

Also similar (but possibly fixable by moving `gobject-introspection` to a
different inputs list?):
 
```
$ nix why-depends -f. beets gobject-introspection.dev
/nix/store/93lfrhm8vp17m8ziqi8vp6v4cff67wkb-beets-1.4.9
╚═══bin/beet: …-expat-2.2.8-dev/bin:/nix/store/y3ym76wrak3300vsjyf3klr52cnzmxwd-gobject-introspection-1.64.1-de…
    => /nix/store/y3ym76wrak3300vsjyf3klr52cnzmxwd-gobject-introspection-1.64.1-dev
```

> ## Other issues

Reviewer 9: More related issues with wrappers https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/160923 and the ones linked at https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/160923#issuecomment-1046067348

    new list instead of it. The other list can include glob patterns as well,
    or specific executables instead. For example:

```nix
  wrapPrograms = [ "$outputLib/libexec/${pname}/run-server" "$out/share/scripts/*" ];
```

3. Most of the packages with linked environment variables, have lots of reverse
   dependencies, so once `makeWrapperAuto` is ready, it'd nice to have a hydra
   job that will build all of these packages with the `wrappers.json` file in
   them. For instance these packages include:
   - `gdk-pixbuf`
   - `gsettings-desktop-schemas`
   - `pango`
   - `gtk3`

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

When switching to `makeWrapperAuto` from `makeWrapper` there shouldn't be
manual usage of `wrapProgram` for most cases. A package that uses `wrapProgram`
should be able to switch to `combineWrappersInfo` and declare any nontrivial
environment variables with it to get propagated to reverse dependencies and to
it's executables automatically.

Currently I imagine the usage of `combineWrappersInfo` (the name can be debated) as
so:

```nix
  # Propagate GST plugins' path

>   postInstall = makeWrapperAuto.combineWrappersInfo {

Author: I wonder whether this is a good design... `combineWrappersInfo`, defined as a Nix function or as a shell function needs to iterate `buildInputs` and `propagatedBuildInputs`. It means that as a Nix function using it will require the user to:

```nix
inherit buildInputs propagatedBuildInputs;
```

In addition to the other arguments. I worry this might make the experience of using this function a bit clumsy.

OTOH, defining `combineWrappersInfo` as a shell function, means that it would need to iterate the inputs via shell which is less clumsy. But, how do I get the dev output of an input? I'm asking because I need to get to the `nix-support/wrappers.json` file which might reside In the `dev` output. Is there a bash equivalent to `lib.getDev`?

Reviewer 6: I don't think there is a function like this in bash.
